More quests - Added The Black Book
 - TODO: Make so objectives can have custom artwork
(DONE) Allow for arrow keys to move. Characters should move to adjacent cells in a zone from wence they came (not snap)
Merge ZBoard and ZQuest - These need not be separated
Make Reflector an implementation (using default methods)
Merge VaultDoor and CellDoor (Meh)
(DONE) Actions inside a vault : TAKE_ITEM / DROP_ITEM
(DONE NEEDS TESTING) Zombies do not seem to be moving toward players after they enter the vault (whats up?)
(DONE)Doors need work, should have 3 new diretions ASCEND / DESCENT to avoid conflicts (NORTH / SOUTH now work to go into and out of a vault)
Should designate some part of board for Messages and Text (Lower left hand corner?)
(DONE) Have quest display quest specific instructions. Should be able to open any time form the side menu
(DONE) Make sure level up works
(DONE) Noise seems not working quite right
(DONE) Add colors to objectives and doors
(DONE) Get dragon puke and torch working
dagger and short sword are exactly the same stats? Maybe dagger should have slighly lower open door %?
- When equipped in a body slot gives +1 damage to melee?
Make sure plenty of arrows / bolts work
Ability to view contents of backpack with details
When hover over zombie show where they will walk to (player they can see or loudest noise)
(DONE) Highlight the loudest cell
Dont spawn new zombies in zones where there are no accessable (like all doors closed leading to players)
 - This is incompatible with Necromancer
Make sure all skills are accounted for in the default players list
Precomute all direction options for zombies given their cell position and the zone of the loudest noise / visible players
- Use Floyd - Marshall Algorithm
Implement enchantments
(DONE) Implement 'Make Noise!'
(DONE) implement Colored doors
Add draw() method to Table class
(DONE NOT TESTED) Add Friendly fire
(DONE) Make sure opening doors, and using weapons makes noise
(DONE) when highlighting a vault door, highlight its other side
(DONE NOT TESTED) implement spellbook
beter job with the menu button
- EQUIP (which hand)
(IN PROGRES)Animations!
(DONE)Enchantments!
(DONE)Shove!
(DONE - IN PROGRESS) More Characters!
(DONE)Spawning should spawn Abominations at times and extra activations
(DONE?)Players should not be able to shoot through vaults
(DONE)Make vault door that descend have open door that looks different than from 'below'
Ability to zoom in and out of map for large maps
Ability to assign startng weapons
(DONE)Abomination should render larger than other zombs
(DONE)Enemies that have multiple turns should have those mapped out in one phase otherwise problems
(DONE) When dual weilding, no need to display RIGHT and LEFT hand in character component.
(DONE) Implement Rotten / Invisibility
Repulse, similar to Shove but more complex
Do we really need SpellType? A Spell is really just magic+skill right?
Zone numbering could be automatic
Rethink the 'once per turn' handling.
- Equipment has a method 'oncePerTurn?' What about SEARCH?
        - Make search a Skill?
Figure out way to not compute the actor rect every frame. Actor could have just a Dimension?
   Dimension gets computed on moves?
   Board rectangles should be normalized to 1x1 squares and scaled based on the screen.
Necromancer behavior:
- Killing a necro means player can remove any one spawn loc form the board
- Necros move toward their 'exit' which is nearest spawn point other than the one associated with itself.
  Reaching the exit emmediatele end the game
Implement Hard, Medium, Easy modes to control spawn rate
Spawn rate needs tuning. To little for blue, to many for yellow
Ability to view a players skills descriptions